so this is m73 I think I'm gonna dump
this one the longest argument about the
most boring object it is pretty boring
in comparison to the rest of the Messier
objects yeah well we're talking about
these four bright ones and then maybe
these three down here it was included by
Messier in his catalog obviously because
we're talking about it today but yeah
even though it's boring I think the
story behind it is an important one
still because it's a story of
confirmation bias and the scientific
process so it's still really important
to sort of understand this so it all
started with Messier when he was
cataloging his objects that had
nebulosity which just means they were
sort of fuzzy in the sky and he said
that that object was fuzzy he thought it
had this nebulosity and so he included
in his catalogue this is like the late
18th century most things that made it
into Messier's catalogue were you know
galaxies or you know supernova remnants
the things that really were sort of
objects and were nebula a couple of
clusters would tend to creep in there as
well star clusters because they do look
a little bit fuzzy as well fast forward
70 years later we've got John Herschel
looking at the same object deciding
whether to include it in his sort of
general catalog of nebulae things and
he's like well I don't really see any
nebulosity around it it's not fuzzy to
my eye at all but Messier included it in
his catalog and his dad really mercial
included it in his catalog of general
things that he was trying to update and
he thought well if they've included it I
better include it in my catalog he was
probably looking at it with a better
telescope wasn't it exactly yeah and so
he couldn't see any nebulosity around it
at all with this pet telescope but he
thought well you know they must have
known something so I'll put it in and
then he even managed to sneak in to the
NGC catalog as well she's got an NGC
number six nine nine four so this object
that you know people have been like this
I don't even know it's a nebula men
ended up in the deep sky catalogue as
well this NGC numbers is not a deep sky
object at all it's just stars in the
Milky Way so this idea of like
confirmation bias where while other
people have seen it so I better include
it you know as money made it nice to
sneak in through all these catalogs but
it's not even a sort of fuzzy nebula
object at all it's made of these
catalogs because people thought well
then it's probably
an open cluster and people thought well
we better figure this out then so early
mm okay
two papers came out sort of within a
month of each other both looking at this
object though is it either an open
cluster or do these stars have nothing
to do with each other at all and they're
really just miles apart from each other
on the sky millions of miles exactly
it's what we call an asterism within a
month of each other these papers came
out one of which said is clearly an open
cluster and one of which said it's
clearly an asterism yeah and they used
exactly the same data and exactly the
same method and still came out with
complete polar opposite answers so what
they were doing was they were plotting
what's called a color magnitude diagram
so people might be familiar with the
hertzsprung-russell diagram of stars so
as you get brighter and brighter you get
bluer and so you end up with this really
tight sequence on a color or brightness
diagram where all the stars lie normally
and it like a normal population of stars
that's got a lot of scatter around it
because you know metallicity changes
things and everything like that but in a
cluster that have all formed from the
same blob of gas at the same time you
end up with a really tight relationship
so what they were doing was they were
taking observing these stars plotting
them on this diagram and seeing was
there this tight relationship there that
we should expect one group looked at it
and said yes it's clearly a tight
relationship there it's Co you know per
cluster and one group looked at it and
said no it's just scatter these stars
aren't related at all so that's you know
a really important point about this idea
of bias in your work you know if you go
into a piece of science research and you
expect to find something you're probably
more likely to find it I mean it does
look kind of clustering it looks a
little bit like an open cluster you do
have these bright stars that are all
there together sort of in the same area
of sky so there's no way of telling just
by looking at it I can maybe give these
people a pass for interpreting the same
data differently I mean these things can
happen but how did I also then get
through peer review yeah well they
always see both papers where independent
peer-reviewed so if you're looking at a
plot and they're saying this clearly
shows this the referee might be like
yeah okay I can see that so you can see
how the bias spreads as well you want to
see the plots side-by-side so the
numbered stars are the ones they think
you're in the cluster and the cross is
the ones that maybe they could be but
maybe they're not and they say this
clearly follows this tight relationship
and then this one here plotting the same
thing where all the stars I think are in
the cluster they say well clearly it's
just scatter and there's no relationship
there so that's the exact same plot as
the other one before the Bema against B
- V V against B - V so another paper
then finally came out in 2002 where
they'd actually thought to get spectra
of these things and with the spectra you
can get the velocity shift relative to
it so the at this idea of red shift blue
shift whether the stars are moving away
from us or towards us so in a cluster
where everything forms from the same
blob of gas and it's all sort of the
same entity you would expect that all
the Styles are moving at roughly the
same velocity to us you know they were
moving sort of together there's one big
group even though within the cluster
some are moving forward and back yeah
exactly there'll be some random motion
in there but generally what we'll see is
H of they're all the same
they're all moving at the same speed
whereas if we don't see that then you
can tell that they're not related at all
and they're just this asterism and so
the velocities that this paper found in
2002 they just took those six brightest
stars that are in this the image that we
saw before and they took the velocities
and they found everything from plus 34
kilometers per second to minus 52
kilometers per second so this huge range
of velocities for these stars which
meant that they had nothing to do each
other at all they didn't know each other
fact from Adam and it was just some
asterism after all this time I told you
it was boring we're getting there people
slowly but surely we're working through
all 110 Messier objects this is another
one off the list as you've probably
noticed by now we're not doing them in
order we're kind of just do
them as and when if you'd like to help
the cause you can support us on patreon
patreon comm slash deep sky videos but
the absolute best thing you can do to
support us is subscribe to the channel
and share the videos with anyone who you
think might enjoy them thanks for
watching